Have you ever had to sue for peace?
While you’re thinking of that question,
would you please turn with me
to Luke chapter 14?
I’d like to put you and me
in the middle of one of Jesus’ illustrations.
Jesus has been talking about what it costs
to become one of his disciples.
And then in verse 31, he says:
“Or what king
“[this is where we come in, what king]
“marching out against another king in war
“does not first sit down and take counsel
whether he is able with 10,000 troops
“to stand up to the one who comes
against him with 20,000?
“If, in fact, he cannot do so,
“then while that one is yet far away,
he sends out a body of ambassadors
and sues for peace.”
How do you think that conversation goes?
“I want peace, and these are my terms.”
Hardly!
It’s more like:
“I don’t want to be your enemy.
Please tell me what to do
so that I can have peace with you.”
Now, with that in mind,
Jesus gives the application, verse 33:
“In the same way, you may be sure
that not one of you
“who does not say good-bye
to all his belongings
can be my disciple.”
That is you and me.
We got to the point where we realized
we did not want to be an enemy of Jehovah.
And so we were willing
to sacrifice everything
—belongings, career, status, everything—
for the privilege of being
at peace with Jehovah
and being a disciple of his Son.
Now for you students of class 150,
your pursuit of peace with Jehovah
has led you
into the special full-time service.
And what a beautiful record
every one of you has set!
You remind me in many ways
of a group in the Bible
that literally sued for peace.
Their story is told
in the book of Joshua chapter 9.
That’s right;
we’re talking about the Gibeonites.
Do you have Joshua chapter 9?
Now, they had heard of all the things
that Jehovah had done
for his people, Israel, and to his enemies.
They did not want to be Jehovah’s enemy.
And so they did exactly
what the king in Jesus’ illustration did.
They sent a body of ambassadors.
So Joshua chapter 9
—and this is the opening overture
in verse 6:
“We have come from a distant land.
Now make a covenant with us.”
When they didn’t get a very warm
initial reception, they persisted.
Verse 8: “We are your servants.”
In other words,
“Set the terms; we want peace.”
They were willing to sacrifice everything
in order to enjoy peace
with Israel and with Israel’s God.
Now, Joshua and the chieftains
didn’t see it exactly the same way,
particularly when they found out
that they were not from a distant land
as they had claimed.
Nobody likes to be fooled.
So the tone got a little sterner.
So turn and look at verse 23.
This is what they said:
“From now on you are cursed,
“and you will always occupy
a slave’s position
as gatherers of wood and drawers of water
for the house of my God.”
What will the Gibeonites say to that?
Verse 25: “We are at your mercy.
Do to us whatever you think
is good and right.”
And just so, the terms of peace were set.
Verse 27: “That day Joshua made them
“gatherers of wood and drawers of water
“for the assembly and for Jehovah’s altar
“at the place that He should choose,
and they remain so to this day.”
So now a few questions, a few lessons.
What do you think
of the Gibeonites’ assignment?
It was presented to them as a punishment.
But just think,
they weren’t being sold off
as household slaves.
Their humble service
would directly contribute
to pure worship and support Jehovah’s people.
That’s a privilege, isn’t it?
That’s the kind of service
we reach out for as a privilege.
Now, the kind of service—
Was it because they were lowly people,
no skills to do anything else,
that they were given this kind of job?
Well, look at chapter 10
and verse 2
and see the kind of people
the Gibeonites were:
“Gibeon was a great city,
like one of the royal cities.
“It was greater than Ai,
and all its men were warriors
[capable, skilled people].”
However,
clearly the Gibeonites realized
that if their army was no match for Israel,
then Jehovah didn’t need them
to bolster his army
in order to complete the conquest.
It was better for them
to ask Jehovah what he wanted them to do
and to do that.
So the sacrifice was definitely worth it.
Does that mean, though,
that their skills were irrelevant,
never even considered?
Well, no.
For example, a few hundred years later,
Ishmaiah the Gibeonite
is listed among David’s 30 mighty men.
Different needs call for different skills.
What did Ishmaiah do with his skill?
Well, he humbly defended pure worship
and Jehovah’s people.
So the details of the assignment
were different,
but the focus was about the same.
Another question: Was this just
a short-term starter assignment?
“Yes, we will do this for now,
but once the campaign is over,
we’ll be able to resume
our regular place in society.”
Go back to verse 27 of chapter 9.
Remember what Joshua said at this point
when he gave them their assignment?
“They remain so to this day.”
Not only to the day
that Joshua wrote these words
but about 900 years later
among the exiles that returned
from Babylon to Jerusalem
to restore pure worship
there were temple servants,
and likely
this included descendants of the Gibeonites.
Just think, these temple servants
once again were willing to leave behind
the life that they’d built up
to make the trek in behalf of pure worship
and take up their duties.
They must have really cherished
their assignment
in order to stick to it that way.
So as we’ve talked about them,
have you been noting some personal lessons?
These are the four that come to my mind.
Number one, as with the king
in Jesus’ illustration and the Gibeonites,
peace with Jehovah is such a treasure.
We’re willing to sacrifice
anything to enjoy it.
Number two, Jehovah’s terms for us
include humble service
on behalf of pure worship
and in support of his people,
and that kind of humble service
we view as the greatest privilege.
Number three, different needs
call for different skills,
and that may lead to a change of assignment
for you or for someone else.
Either way, we don’t compete
and we don’t compare.
The details of the assignment
may be different,
but the focus, or goal, is always the same.
And the fourth one,
we cherish our assignments.
We’re going to stay in them
as long as Jehovah allows.
In short, we cherish our assignments;
we love our God.
Peace with Jehovah is a treasure
that we will never let go.